Kenya, how did Raila Odinga do it? 🤔 In most African countries, opposition leaders are jailed, beaten, or forced into exile. But for Raila Odinga, it’s been shockingly different. No matter how hard they fought him, all 4 past Kenyan presidents ended up working with him. Take a look at it for yourself: - Despite a long history of political rivalry, Raila joined Daniel arap Moi’s government in 2001. Even Moi had to find a way to work with him. He made him a minister. - After the 2007 election crisis, Raila became Prime Minister of Kenya under Mwai Kibaki. Kibaki too had to work with him. - In 2018, Raila and Uhuru Kenyatta shook hands. Once enemies, now partners. Uhuru also worked with him. - With William Ruto, it seemed Raila had no chance. Ruto refused to work with him at first. But just a few months ago, they signed a deal to form a broad-based government. Ruto ended up working with him too. Baba’s ability to turn opponents into allies should be a research topic in every political science classroom. I mean, how did he do it? I wonder if there will ever come someone close to being like Rt. Hon. Raila Odinga, EGH again. -- You have my prayers.
Surely he was a kingmaker. To me, I would agree with Uncle Miguna Miguna when he said that he was a " coward" for betraying the liberation. If you observe how he was mistreated after losing, only sympathy and political pressure of civil war forced the Leaders in power to diffuse the tension. I strongly believe that he lost voters every time he was changing goal posts because the political ideologies were changing every season.
Raila wasn’t just a politician he was the marking scheme itself. Every president eventually had to copy his answers just to pass the test of leadership. That’s why Today Kenya is struggling to handle his funeral how do you bury a man who defined the standard? May his soul rest in eternal power
But what did he do to the people? There are enough evidences of his utter corruption. He was a multi millionaire yet didnt invest to build quality hospitals so that one dont have to fly to India. So he stayed in all this administrations cos he is smart...he will bend himself and all to stay alive and accumulate wealth. Really what's so good about him?
By not being selfish
By putting the needs of the country first He wasn't ego centric. He also wasn't greedy. To date, I've never heard of a corruption scandal in the media about him.
He played his main bargaining chip very well. The entire Luo tribe and their blind tribal loyalty were his leverage and political raison d'etre. He also used this for personal gain. He also had in his favour a lot of negative support/votes, those cast against Kikuyu and Kalenjin hegemony. There are no mysteries here are there? He will be missed for his courage in frequently standing up to oppression by those in power.
He was a selfless man.
Knowing when to retaliate and collaborate is what made Raila unique. Also he understood that leadership isn't about position but idealised influence.
Grand Chess master. A good student of political strategy. He got exposed in early international political scheming. The Cold war, Adolf Hitler,Mao Sang,Pan African independence struggle -Soviet bulcanisation, and many more. What defines him most is "courage" and "conviction". A lion and a fox in him. He is a great Michavali (the prince)a state -craft whose legacy lives on. A true Pan African heir.
I applaud this piece. However, Raila was jailed, tortured and attempted exile multiple times under the Moi regime. Moi's attempt to bring Raila on board was an attempt to torpedo the formation of Pentagon - which his intelligence had warned him will overhaul the political environment, and it did. Let's not downplay the dark part of his journey while we remember him. It is that foundation that makes him the phoenix, time and time again. He was a political genius, he knew the game, that's why he has always known how to rise.