Trump promises 'largest tax cuts' with Americans saving up to $20,000 next year
In President Donald Trump's Wednesday address to the nation, he said that American taxpayers will save between $11,000 and $20,000 next year
President Donald Trump made another bold assertion about tax cuts during his nationally televised address to the nation from the White House on Wednesday, Dec. 18.
His speech was directly aimed at easing the anxieties of American households about the cost of living by portraying the first year of his second term as a success. The president said that American taxpayers will save between $11,000 and $20,000 next tax season.
“Next year, you will also see the results of the largest tax cuts in American history that were really accomplished through our great Big, Beautiful Bill, perhaps the most sweeping legislation ever passed in Congress,” Trump said.
“We wrapped 12 different bills up into one beautiful bill. That includes no tax on tips, no tax on overtime, and no tax on Social Security for our great seniors,” he explained in his speech. “Under these cuts, many families will be saving between $11,000 and $20,000 a year, and next spring is projected to be the largest tax refund season of all time.”
This comes as two-thirds of Americans think the economy is not doing well today, despite Trump’s claims, according to a new survey conducted by GQR on behalf of The Century Foundation (TCF).
What are the details of Trump's new tax cuts planned for next year?
The Trump Administration is framing its tax cuts as a “big, beautiful success story,” referring to a package of tax cuts for “working families” that was passed by congressional Republicans and signed into law by the president.
This law makes Trump’s lowered 2017 tax rates permanent, increases the standard deduction, and expands the child tax credit, according to the House Ways and Means Committee report. Additionally, it provides “no tax on tips, no tax on overtime, and no tax on Social Security.”
The committee says that the standard deduction will increase to $1,500 per family and the Child Tax Credit will be boosted to $2,200, indexed to inflation.
Furthermore, the report says that taxpayers are expected to keep an additional $91 billion in refunds. However, the size of your tax refund is subject to your specific filing status, taxable income, and more.
Will I save up to $20,000 in taxes in 2026?
While American taxpayers may be excited at the prospect of saving anywhere from $11,000 to $20,000 during the 2026 tax season, only certain households will be able to benefit from these yearly tax savings.
In its report, the Ways and Means Committee outlined that these tax cuts will increase tax refunds by around $1,000. This could potentially translate to an average tax refund of $4,151 during the 2026 filing season, which is up from the IRS’s average of $3,151 in 2024, as reported by Kiplinger.
Not everyone is included in Trump’s promise of the “largest tax cuts." Bloomberg reports that the Americans who will benefit the most from Trump’s tax law will be “wealthy taxpayers in high-tax states like California, New York, and New Jersey." Workers who collect tips or overtime and senior citizens will also see a boost.
Plus, people who claim multiple children on their taxes and fully benefit from the enhanced Child Tax Credit will see larger tax savings.
According to a Piper Sandler analysis that the House referenced in its report, middle and upper-income households — specifically households earning between $60,000 and $400,000 — will benefit the most from Trump's tax cuts.