Amy Coney Barrett’s nomination and confirmation to the Supreme Court, both violates our core democratic norms related to judicial legitimacy, and reveals contempt for key components of U.S. equality law on LGBT rights.
The Senate Judiciary Committee moved Amy Coney Barrett forward to a full-Senate confirmation vote, violating its own rules – an apt reflection of this “illegitimate nomination,” as Senator Schumer termed it. Trump’s and McConnell’s public announcements — before Ruth Bader Ginsberg’s funeral — were disrespectful as well as hypocritical. Then the Senate confirmed her. These acts violated Republican Senators’ prior objections to proceeding with a nomination in the midst of an election, an election tainted by continued evidence of Russian interference. In their long campaign to pack and stack the Supreme Court, Republicans ignored their pledges not to proceed with an election-year nomination.
Decades ago, when civil rights leader turned Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall died, a Republican (George Bush) replaced him with Clarence Thomas. Marshall crafted civil rights as a lawyer, honed the law on affirmative action as a Justice, and then was replaced by someone determined to undermine that precise legacy. Make no mistake, opponents of equality used Thomas’s Black identity to realize their goals. At the time, some Black intellectuals wrote that Thomas’s black-ness would come out as a Justice and serve Black people. This occurred only once, when Thomas objected to cross burnings.
Trump has taken the death of civil rights leader-turned Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg as a comparable opportunity, choosing Amy Coney Barrett not to empower women, but because he wanted to use her woman-ness to undermine women’s rights, notably abortion. It makes sense, given that Trump’s record on the women’s rights issues that were Ginsburg’s hallmark: far more women have accused him of sexual assault than have been named to cabinet posts. In this sense, Barrett, like Thomas before her, is a top beneficiary of the identity politics so many Republicans assail.
Then the hearings began. Barrett’s opening statement assured the public of her “independence.” While her language in that statement was neutral, observers listened for whether Barrett would say anything to cleanse her nomination of the rank partisanship and possible taint of a quid pro quo at its origin. Would she convey a respect for the fundamental norms of equality that drive our constitutions and our laws? Would she respect precedent, or hew to a muted (to the public, if not the Federalist Society) agenda? Would she even discuss the issues that have led some, such as radio host Michelangelo Signorile to call her agenda extreme? Barrett could have taken Democrats’ questions seriously and answered sincerely and in an engaged fashion.
She could have likewise taken seriously the appearance of a quid pro quo with Trump (who openly stated he wants a justice on the Court to decide the election) and recused herself from any litigation. She specifically declined to do so. She could have demonstrated a respect for equality and fairness at the core of our democracy. Had she done so, she might have garnered some support from across the aisle despite the corruption in the White House and the corruption of the Senate process. Nominees from both parties’ presidents have garnered broader support. Ginsburg won confirmation 96-3. Roberts garnered 78-22. Their nomination processes legitimized their role on the Court and contributed to their success on the Court.
By contrast, instead of advancing legitimacy, both process and Barrett’s own conduct reveal the danger posed by her likely confirmation to the Court. On the current Court, at best a 4-4 split exists on key voting rights issues that present themselves before the election. Barrett would tip these decisions. If election litigation rises to the Court, how will its resolution appear objective?
Republicans rushed her through the hearings with unprecedented speed and no transparent investigation. They focused on her family affairs rather than her views on law and public policy. Her studied non-answers to legitimate questions left neutral observers unconvinced of her qualifications, notably with her refusal to address marriage equality. As a result, Masha Gessen shockingly described them as “bullshit” hearings. The Republicans’ behavior reflects a complete dereliction of their duty to vet nominees to the Supreme Court.
Evan Wolfson, LGBT rights leader, has said the nomination, and the nominee, must be rejected. As Linda Greenhouse recently put it, Wolfson, starting with his Harvard Law School thesis in 1983, “imagined a world where sexual orientation did not determine a person’s access to the legal, financial and emotional benefits of marriage.” In response to this inquiry, Wolfson wrote:
“This nomination is a travesty. I believe (1) the Republicans’ entire process of recklessly rushing this through (a) during an election, (b) instead of dealing with the ongoing pandemic, (c) without allowing any meaningful scrutiny renders it illegitimate — and (2) she has not met the affirmative burden on any nominee to demonstrate a commitment to equality, protection of the most vulnerable, and independence (given her Federalist Society grooming and link to Trump’s explicit election-related agenda). There are many alarming signs, and she contemptuously refused to address, let alone dispel, reasonable concerns, let alone renounce this rush job and the consequent taint and appearance of bias.”
Jeannie Suk Gersen offered a thoughtful analysis that considered carefully both Barrett’s record and career. Suk Gersen suggests that, like other conservative nominees, Barrett may join the Court as a hard conservative but could move left to match popular opinion once ensconced on the Court. Indeed, some conservative justices – notably John Roberts and Neil Gorsuch – have on occasion ended up supporting liberal decisions.
As a handmaid in the People of Praise, it seems at least plausible she adheres to core beliefs that likely conflict with current Supreme Court jurisprudence. Several of our legal traditions of equality and privacy may be threatened: first, women have the right to abort a fetus (Roe), second, that but that all people can marry whoever they like without regard to their sex (Obergefell), and third, that federal discrimination laws will protect LGBT people (Bostock). Even the most controversial of these decisions, Roe, holds 77% support among the public. Barrett’s own scholarship suggests how judges should acknowledge conflicts between the law and faith, and sometimes recuse themselves from such cases. She failed to convey she would adhere to those very principles in her hearing testimony, only doubling down on her originalist approach which leaves little room for empathy, as Dahlia Lithwick has argued.
Such empathy includes referring to people in the terms they view as respectful. Inclusive language would at least have conveyed Barrett’s indirect acceptance of her support for core principles of equality, which was particularly necessary given her choice to remain silent in the hearings on key LGBT issues like marriage equality. She could have done this even while maintaining her principles. In the hearings, Barrett said she does not discriminate based on “sexual preference.” It is not a question of mere semiotics – Barrett’s words do matter, particularly as a federal judge. Her use of this term is a marker itself of discrimination. Those of us who are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender do not prefer to be that way, or not. It is an orientation and as core a part of one’s identity as any other. Transgender women are not “physiological males,” as Barrett said in 2016. We do not choose to these identities, they are of who we are.
Based on Barrett’s historical commitments on LGBT rights, we may note the interesting news that Pope Francis voiced support for civil unions between people of the same sex. Some have asked whether this will alter Barrett’s jurisprudence. It seems unlikely. While Francis is the leader of the Catholic faith around the world, Catholics, at least in the U.S. have favored marriage equality for a decade. Barrett’s positions on individual rights, including women’s and LGBT rights, are her own, and sit well outside the mainstream, and will likely drive her jurisprudence as it has played a role in her career.
It does seem likely, however, that Barrett will support increasing religious exceptions to equality. For those of us concerned about equality, this may make all the difference. A Supreme Court that included Barrett may reward businesses and individuals who profess a particular faith with the special right to avoid following antidiscrimination norms. In such a world, businesses like Masterpiece Cake Shop may decline to make cakes for LGBT couples. Government employees may refuse to do their job for religious reasons, like Kim Davis denying a license to a same-sex couple seeking to marry. Even scarier, people may proffer religious affiliations to avoid treating people equally without regard to their race, sex, sexual orientation or gender identity.
The United States pioneered the notion of universal rights that apply to each of us. As Martin Luther King Jr. said, “Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” But Barrett’s record, and her conduct, bespeak discrimination, not equality.
Hypocrisy and bad faith define this nomination during an election without proper hearings. The subsequent rapid confirmation, and her immediate appearance in a Trump campaign advertisement around her taking the oath, only further her defiling the highest judicial office of our land. Barrett failed to demonstrate that she would be a justice who would serve the nation as a whole, rather than her anti-woman, anti-gay, anti-transgender agenda. Her installation on the Court, after this fatally flawed process, undermines her legitimacy, that of the Court, and that of our democracy itself. And we will need to repair that damage.