Find tax debt help
Answer a few questions to find your options to resolve a tax debt.
Popular topics
Help & contact
Sign in or create an account to access and manage your personal tax information in one place.
File an amended return to fix a mistake on your tax return.
To get an IP PIN, sign in or create an account.
You can also get one with an application or in person.
An IP PIN is a six-digit number that prevents someone else from filing a tax return with your Social Security number (SSN) or individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). The IP PIN is known only to you and the IRS. It helps us verify your identity when you file an electronic or paper return.
To view your tax records and transcripts, sign in or create an account.
You can also request a transcript by mail.
Report to us if you suspect a tax scam, fraud or identity theft.
Contact us by phone or in person.
Phone
We’re available 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. local time.
- United States: 800-829-1040
- TTY/TDD: 800-829-4059
- International: Call or live chat
Before you call
Have this information ready:
- Social Security number (SSN) or individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN)
- Filing status – single, head of household, married filing jointly, married filing separately or qualifying surviving spouse
- Tax return you’re calling about
- Prior-year tax return
- Any correspondence we sent you
In person
Make an appointment for help at a local IRS Taxpayer Assistance Center (TAC).
Sign in or create an account to manage your business tax information.
Get an EIN for free from the IRS. This federal tax identification number is for businesses, tax-exempt organizations and other entities.
Deposit and report federal employment taxes
Employers are required to pay employment taxes. These include federal income tax and Additional Medicare tax withheld, and both the employer and employee Social Security and Medicare taxes.
Estimated taxes are paid quarterly based on the income you expect your business to receive in a year. Federal income tax in the US is paid as you earn income.
View a table of standard mileage rates for 2025.
Request a transcript for your business. You can choose from different transcript types.
Sign in or create an account to request individual POA and TIA, withdraw active authorizations, view client tax information and make payments on behalf of individuals.
Use e-Services to access:
- E-file provider services
- Affordable Care Act (ACA)
- Information Returns Intake System (IRIS)
- Transcript Delivery System (TDS)
- Taxpayer identification number (TIN) matching
- Application Program Interface (API) Client ID
Anyone who prepares or assists in preparing federal tax returns for compensation must have a valid preparer tax identification number (PTIN).
Sign in to TIN matching to validate a taxpayer identification number (TIN) and name combination.
Use TDS to view your client’s return and account information.
Find phone numbers and contact information for:
Sign in or create an account to manage tax information for your tax-exempt organization.
Apply for tax-exempt status as a 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), or 501(a).
Confirm an organization is eligible to receive tax-deductible charitable contributions. Search tax exempt organizations to check tax-exempt status and filings.
Get an EIN for free from the IRS. This federal tax identification number is required to apply for tax-exempt status and file returns.
You must be a legally formed organization before you apply for an EIN.
Sign in or create an account to manage tax information for a government entity.
Get governmental liaison information
Find contact information in Office of Governmental Liaison, Publication 6009 PDF