House Republican campaign arm touts tax cuts in new 2026 election ad
Republicans are trying to defend a razor-thin majority in the House and are running on tax policies passed last year.
U.S. President Donald Trump speaks at an event about the economy at the Circa Resort and Casino in Las Vegas, Nevada, U.S., January 25, 2025.
Leah Millis | Reuters
The National Republican Congressional Committee on Tuesday launched a digital ad campaign in 14 competitive congressional districts across 11 states touting GOP-led tax breaks.
The campaign, reported first by CNBC, is part of a Republican effort during the week taxes are due to highlight proposals, like no tax on tips and no tax on overtime, that were enacted as part of the 2025 GOP tax and spending bill.
"After years of Democrats squeezing working Americans dry, House Republicans stepped in and delivered real relief," NRCC spokesman Mike Marinella said in a statement. "Bigger paychecks, lower taxes, and proof that when Republicans lead, working families come first."
Marinella did not disclose the cost of the campaign, but described it as a "modest ad buy."
Read more CNBC politics coverage
President Donald Trump has also often promoted the so-called One Big Beautiful Bill Act, calling its provisions "the largest tax cuts in American history," in a speech at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, in January.
The ad comes amid a midterm election cycle in which voters are laser-focused on the economy and a war in Iran that has made affordability a looming campaign issue.
Republicans are hoping to retain slim majorities in both the House and Senate but face an uphill climb, particularly in the lower chamber, where the GOP has a 217-214 edge (Rep. Kevin Kiley of California is a former Republican who recently switched his registration to Independent but still caucuses with the GOP).
The prediction market platform Kalshi as of Monday gives Democrats an 86% chance of winning the House in the midterms. Meanwhile, Trump's economic approval rating recently hit a career low, according to a CNN poll released earlier this month.
A separate CNN poll found that just 28% of Americans hold a favorable view of the Democratic Party, while Republicans were slightly more popular at 32%.
The NRCC, the political committee working to get Republicans elected to the House, is targeting voters in competitive districts in Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Iowa, Michigan, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia and Wisconsin.
"Hardworking Americans power this country. Clocking in early, staying late, doing whatever it takes. Democrats made it harder to get ahead. Spiking inflation to 40-year highs. But Nick Begich changed that.
Voting for real tax relief that puts more money back in your pocket," says the voiceover in the ad for Begich, who is seeking a second term as Alaska's at-large representative.
Democrats have also recently hit out at Republicans for their handling of the economy. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee last month launched an ad campaign geotargeted to show up on Meta platforms while users are near gas stations.
Average gas prices have soared since the start of the Iran war and were up to a nationwide average of more than $4 per gallon on Monday, according to GasBuddy, and inflation spiked in March.