ALTERED: This video purportedly of Raila Odinga declaring 26 October 2023 a public holiday is doctored
The original video is of the opposition chief unlawfully declaring 20 March 2023 a public holiday.
This video shared on TikTok supposedly of Azimio la Umoja-One Kenya leader Raila Odinga declaring 26 October 2023 a public holiday is ALTERED.
The video was accompanied by a text suggesting that Odinga declared the public holiday to allow Kenyans to celebrate former President Uhuru Kenyatta’s 62nd birthday.
“Raila declares 26 October, Uhuru’s birthday as a public holiday,” reads the in-video text.
In the video, Odinga says: “We declare will be a public holiday (sic)”, without mentioning the exact date when the said holiday will take effect.
The video also features short clips of Deputy President Rigathi Gachagua and Kenyatta.
But did Odinga declare 26 October 2023 a public holiday?
First, the Public Holidays Act has outlined all the holidays available in Kenya, and 26 October is not one of them.
Additionally, the Act mandates declaring any other public holiday to the Cabinet Secretary (CS), but has not specified which CS. Previously, the Ministry of Interior and Coordination of Government cabinet secretaries have made declarations on public holidays.
Google reverse image search results on a keyframe from the video established that the original clip is of the opposition chief unlawfully declaring 20 March 2023 a “public holiday”.
The original video was taken on 14 March 2023 and features Odinga saying: “We declare that Monday the 20th of March will be a public holiday.” (Start at 1:37)
The video we are debunking was edited to remove the section where the former prime minister says, “Monday the 20th of March.”
The original clip was also published here and here.
PesaCheck examined a video shared on TikTok, supposedly of Azimio la Umoja-One Kenya leader Raila Odinga declaring 26 October 2023 a public holiday, and found it to have been ALTERED.
This post is part of an ongoing series of PesaCheck fact-checks examining content marked as potential misinformation on Facebook and other social media platforms.
By partnering with Facebook and similar social media platforms, third-party fact-checking organisations like PesaCheck are helping to sort fact from fiction. We do this by giving the public deeper insight and context to posts they see in their social media feeds.
Have you spotted what you think is fake or false information on Facebook? Here’s how you can report. And, here’s more information on PesaCheck’s methodology for fact-checking questionable content.
This fact-check was written by PesaCheck fact-checker Rodgers Omondi and edited by PesaCheck senior copy editor Cédrick Irakoze.
The article was approved for publication by PesaCheck managing editor Doreen Wainainah.
PesaCheck is East Africa’s first public finance fact-checking initiative. It was co-founded by Catherine Gicheru and Justin Arenstein, and is being incubated by the continent’s largest civic technology and data journalism accelerator: Code for Africa. It seeks to help the public separate fact from fiction in public pronouncements about the numbers that shape our world, with a special emphasis on pronouncements about public finances that shape government’s delivery of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) public services, such as healthcare, rural development and access to water / sanitation. PesaCheck also tests the accuracy of media reportage. To find out more about the project, visit pesacheck.org.
PesaCheck is an initiative of Code for Africa, through its innovateAFRICA fund, with support from Deutsche Welle Akademie, in partnership with a coalition of local African media and other civic watchdog organisations.