High School Swim Coach Alleges He Was Fired After Comparing Black Lives Matter to KKK
A high school swim coach in Wisconsin alleges that he was let go from his job as a result of online posts that compared the Black Lives Matter organization to the Ku Klux Klan. Tim Damico was an assistant swimming and diving coach for Germantown High School in suburban Milwaukee for the last three seasons. He graduated from Germantown in 2011.
He was let go last month, allegedly over a Facebook post on July 9 comparing Black Lives Matter to the KKK. The school’s athletic director, Damico says, cited concern of his Facebook posts in not renewing his contract.
From a letter that Tim Damico wrote to the website of a local conservative talk radio show:
“On Thursday July 9th I shared a post to my Facebook page comparing the KKK to the BLM organization, not the statement “Black Lives Matter” because of course I agree with the statement, but the political organization is not something that I as a conservative can or will ever support.”
Citing legal concerns, the district has not released Damico’s Facebook posts. Germantown school board president Bob Soderberg contended that Tim Damico was misrepresenting the conversation with the athletic director. He added that Damico can appeal his termination via an official process but has not yet done so.
“As a district, we have a duty to our students, our staff and our community to make certain that our sports programs and activities are not disrupted, and that our personnel don’t actively discourage the student body for going out for sports,” Germantown superintendent Brett Stousland told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. “We felt that his behavior would cause such a substantial disruption within our swimming program that would seriously damage student participation.”
In other words, if you don’t fall in line with the liberal machine your opinions don’t matter
Kelly Spencer Williams : That’s not really the issue Kelly.
You are upset that a racist swim coach got fired?
Jake Des Roches no, I’m upset that people can no longer express themselves on their personal forums. And neither you, nor I, have read the post as it has not been released, so you cannot state it was racist
Kelly Spencer Williams Free speech means you can’t be arrested. It does not mean that the organizations you represent won’t disassociate themselves from you.
Jake Des Roches explain how he is racist?
Jo Ellen Parkey did I call out free speech?
Greg Simmon He compared an organization dedicated to racial justice to a strictly all white organization that has spent more than a century lynching and terrorizing Black Americans, attacking black churches and homes, killing innocent Black children, raping Black women and then leaving them to die. Do you not see a problem with that?
Andrew Ruiz he “allegedly” compared a group that terrorized blacks with a group that is currently terrorizing everyone
I’m with Andrew. BLM is a civil rights organization, advocating equality. They’ve been organizing peaceful protests for several years now, demanding equal treatment. Kelly, do you know much of the history of Jim Crow, of lynching? When George Floyd was casually murdered, did you fear for your children, or, if you are young did you fear for yourself or your friends? Virtually EVERY mother, every person of color felt terrorized by that event. Even the rich and famous have stories to tell about surviving, barely, a police interaction. That’s why people say Black Lives Matter, because it is about time black, brown, red, yellow lives mattered as much as white lives.
Kelly Spencer Williams terrorizing who and in what way? How is calling out systemic racism and racists terrorizing? I don’t see BLM protests lynching or killing anyone.
Kelly Spencer Williams : I saw it.
Kelly Spencer Williams : No, he 100% did that.
He might be getting a severe punishment for it but it was a moronic and irresponsible post.
Andrew Ruiz look at the news, they are killing people in the streets, burning homes and businesses
LOL ok you’re clearly uneducated about this topic. I’ve been to a BLM protest with 30,000 people and it was entirely peaceful, no rioting, no violence. Do your own research instead of being a blind sheep and commenting nonsense on FB.
Andrew Ruiz I’m sorry, I watch the news and read the paper. I’m glad you’ve been to ONE peaceful protest, but I’ve seen my city destroyed by those same “peaceful” protesters
Kelly Spencer Williams : BLM ✊? is “killing people” and “burning homes”? You better check your sources again.
Dude All you have to do is look at the countless videos of BLM outside of mainstream media and you would know they are not violent. Yes, there have been riots but what do expect when police attack protesters with rubber bullets and tear gas? Just say your racist and go.
Protestors don’t not break the law Andrew or insight violence yelling and spitting at cops is not peaceful so who is the uneducated one? Read the BLM website list of demands… seems kinda racist
Donald P. Spellman look at Portland and Minneapolis
Andrew Ruiz learn English, it’s “you’re”
oooo you got me off of one typo. Still doesn’t hide the fact that you’re uninformed.
Kelly Spencer Williams : Yeah, let’s unpack that a bit.
In Minneapolis most the fires were started by right-wing militiamen wanting the next “race war” and there was ample antagonism by law enforcement officers (many brought in from outside of the Twin Cities).
In Portland we had Trumpy send in federal border patrol officers to aggressively confront a mostly peaceful protest occupation in the downtown area that took up around 9 to 11 city blocks.
I’m not excusing any radical anarchists who decided to break stuff or the looting that eventually took place but this is not the same tactics or motivations of the KKK in either case.
?
Andrew Ruiz no, I don’t. If you think that the BLM is “dedicated to racial justice” than you are the problem. WTH do you think BLM has done to society this year? Your opinion may be ok with the liberal socialists but not for the majority. Differing opinions don’t make them wrong- grow up.
Greg Simmon seems like you’re the one that needs to grow up but ok
Andrew Ruiz – says the young, uneducated Millennial ?
Greg Simmon says the young, college educated* millennial. Go read a book or something.
KKK was/is a white supremacist hate group whose primary focus was African Americans but also included Jews, immigrants, leftists, homosexuals and until recently, Catholics. They are responsible for thousands of lynchings – murders.
BLM, est. 2013 – advocating for non violent civil disobedience in protest against police brutality and all racially motivated violence against Black people.
Where is the similarity?
Free speech is the right of people which stated in the Constitution of the nation. I will stand for him to appeal the high school’s decision.
Phạm Minh Triết : Wrong. Read the 1st Amendment again. It only protects a citizen from government persecution.
Phạm Minh Triết
You may want to stay seated for this one, Pham. It seems you have trouble understanding the basic tenants of 1A, which prohibits *government* limits on our freedom of expression.
Donald P. Spellman schools are government run entities.
Donald P. Spellman you do realize that public schools are in this sense, a government entity. If they weren’t, prayer could not have been removed on constitutional grounds. While I don’t disagree that the organization of BLM has some worse qualities than the klan, I would be very careful what I posted in today’s time. We have told our swimmers to be certain whatever posts they want to make should be reviewed and for them to be sure it doesn’t cross a line that could cause issues within team or as a representative of the team. The Apostle Peter cautioned that just because something is legal, doesn’t mean we should do it. From a more secular source, Coach Herm Edward regularly cautioned NFL Rookies “don’t push send”.
Phạm Minh Triết Kelly Spencer Williams Free speech means you can’t be arrested. It does not mean that the organizations you represent won’t disassociate themselves from you.
Kelly Spencer Williams And a coach can be forced for behavior, including speech, outside of the classroom or field of play.
Rick Stanfield : I thought Herm Edwards was a religious guy / coach?
The swim coach isn’t going to jail. He’s not being criminally charged. He lost his job.
Kelly Spencer Williams : Not federal run entities. He’s not being charged with a crime.
Donald P. Spellman he is, but, I was offering it as another less intentional spiritual source as example. I realize he isn’t going to jail, but, depending on the exact post and the exact rules of the school, it could be a first amendment issue. I personally doubt that it is, but, not because a HS isn’t considered a government entity. I imagine the school, like most employers have guidelines for what can and cannot be posted. Even tho I’m retired from all but summer league coaching, I would not have made the comparison unless, 1. I thought I was offering a legitimate argument. 2. I offered specific evidence as to why I felt that way based upon the specific statements made by the two groups. For the record, I wouldn’t because, even with cited information, it’s not a discussion most even entertain. I think it was careless to post something without any supporting info and especially as a school district employee. As one here says, employees can be fired for what they do and say, IF, it violates standards of conduct delineated by the district/school etc. I prefer Herm, Peter or even my view. Sometimes, the best thing to say, is nothing.
Freedom of speech but not freedom from consequences of that speech.
Rick Stanfield : A “secular” source would be people like Salomon Rushdie or Christopher Hitchens.
Donald P. Spellman I know. I like what Herm said. I didn’t describe him correctly. Was just offering another way to look at it. I’ve had discussions with older swimmers from our club team when I coached, our summer leaguers and even some college kids I’ve worked with. Every new voice from coaches can help them from saying something that doesn’t need saying. Back when I swam(before lanes ropes and water), we said stupid things all the time. The two things that saved us were no records of them and the fact that way more people understood young people say and do things and grow out of it and see their errors. That’s hard these days because so many want to make someone known by the stupidest thing they said or did.
Rick Stanfield BLM has worse qualities than the KKK? You mean the organization that has spent over a century lynching and terrorizing Black Americans? The organization that blew up black churches and houses? The organization that has murdered innocent black men, women, and children for as little as looking at a white person? The organization that dedicated itself to white supremacy?
You’re pathetic and an idiot.
Rick Stanfield : I get your point. I think the punishment here might be severe too but it was a really terrible comparison and I would expect to be reprimanded for saying something so tone deaf and historically inaccurate.
Andrew Ruiz not worse. Different and terrible. They are specifically against the nuclear family which is easy to see since the Civil Rights movement, has deteriorated significantly. I merely ask folks to read what the specific organizational statements are. As for the klan, their history is abhorrent. They have faded significantly, especially in terms of the things done from just last mid 20th century backwards. Even if they were still doing the heinous things I personally saw after the fact(burning crosses and such), that doesn’t mean BLM gets a pass for what I consider abhorrent. I read their site about a week and half ago. Much of what has been said about them, is indeed there. We should call out evil when we see it. When an organization states they want to destroy the nuclear family, believe completely in abortion and ignores what some in their own community do to others, I find them despicable.
Rick Stanfield So you’re saying that attempting to destroy the nuclear family (which they’re not) and giving women power over their own bodies is just as bad as murdering black men, women, and children simply because of their race. I’m sorry but I think you have your morals mixed up. The KKK and white supremacy are still alive in the US today and growing.
Andrew Ruiz they specifically state that is a goal on their site. Murder of the unborn, significantly weighted percentage wise to blacks, should be a concern to any group stating they care about black people. Having lived when the klan actually was very active, the current iteration, which is exceedingly limited, is hardly a concern. I haven’t seen a legitimate incidence of klan members lynching anyone, burning down houses and churches. Each time something happens where they are at first implicated, it turns out to be false. It is easy to see you’ve not read any of what the organization, BLM, stands for or who the players are at the top. For the record, the klan had an identity. White supremacy has lost almost all meaning because of how it is used against anyone who doesn’t fall in line. There would be some out there who will call me one because I call out evil when I see it. They would be wrong, but, in today’s world, the name became meaningless. So you know, I actually know what an actual white supremacist actually is and is not. Seen my share working in mental health in prison system for decades. Those guys have a set of principles(for lack of better definition) by which they live and believe. Given the chance, they would do what Antifa does currently. Problem for them is, they are called out and turned in when we see them.
Donald P. Spellman and what exactly happened to him? Firing from a government job is adverse government action.
Brent Fletcher actually the 1st Amendment protects against adverse actions by government (public schools are part of that government).
Kids should look at this and learn that what you post on social media can have negative consequences
Especially if you post racist things
Jake Des Roches what exactly did he say that was racist? The article indicates a lack of support for the political entity BLM, not the sentiment.
just because someone doesn’t support the BLM group doesn’t mean they are racist. I believe in equality for all people, but do not support the BLM movement because they do not believe the classic family structure to be essential to the bettering of society. I suggest reading their mission statement and doing some soul searching as to whether your own values align with theirs or not. We can disagree with others and still get along, it’s called tolerance and most adults understand this concept.
In other words, being a divisive, selfish blowhard will lose you your job of leading young people.
#ByeFelicia
Anne-Marie Tucker no, Obama kept his for 8 years.
Julie Cologrante Stephen Hmmm.
This is NOT a “free speech” issue. Freedom of speech only protects you from government persecution under the US Constitution.
If you post or say tone deaf and /or asinine statements online then there might be consequences for it.
This person freely posted a terrible comparison online between a group fighting to end police brutality and a known hate group founded on white supremacy and Confederate nostalgia that MURDERED people of color as a hobby for decades across the southern states. The school is taking action. It might be a little harsh but Coach Tim doesn’t seem really repentant so I don’t have much sympathy for him. I wouldn’t want someone thinking stuff that delusional around my athletes or coaching my daughters.
He should be fired for that.
How dare he… The truth is KKK is worse
Nice. We need less racists in power positions.
Racism has no place in the swimming community.
William Wheeler Marxism and communism have no place in the United States.
Can’t wait for the election to pass, for covid to pass, so we can all just focus on swimming again lol
If you don’t know your history please keep your comments to yourself if you can’t say nothing nice don’t say nothing at all all lives matter we are children of God color has no face we all bleed men women and children think before your actions take place.
Sharif Alaoui , hi coach. Hope you and your family is well.
Maria Icheva Hi Maria, Missing you and your family. Hope all is well with you as well
Unfortunately every day all kids at schools or colleges are bombarded with the teachers opinions on life, including their own political views. And most of them imply that only their point is the correct one.
Good!
Consequences of racist behavior.
Tina Lauricella Barglow excuse me? What are you talking about? Being against a Marxist organization like BLM is not racist, so knock it off.
What happened to freedom of speech or is that only if you are a liberal? Askin for a friend….
Julie Cologrante Stephen “Freedom of speech” doesn’t mean that you’re free from consequences from your employer or peers.
Carlene Takaki granted, it was a bad analogy, but let’s face it. What is now calling itself BLM does NOT represent the bulk of the black community. The rioting and looting is not representative of the black community, so in some ways, maybe it was a good analogy.
Julie Cologrante Stephen I respectfully disagree. I think the BLM movement has gotten a lot done and brought attention to the struggles of black and brown people in the US. As a “model minority” (Asian), I have recently began to understand my privilege largely due to the BLM movement. I’ve had many swimmers who have attended peaceful BLM marches and protests, and they, too are recognizing their privilege and/or inherent struggles and working to make things better for the world they grow up into.
Carlene Takaki I agree. The REAL BLM movement has gotten a lot done, but they have been hijacked by these crazy rioters. People quit listening when that started to happen. I have always understood my privilege largely because I have had black friends all my life and have watched their struggle. The peaceful marches are amazing, but do you really think that what is going on in Portland helps BLM? I want my grandchildren to have a world where every person matters. Where skin color, whether black, brown or otherwise, does not make a person different…..just unique. But in all honesty, I don’t think that will ever happen. Racism is handed down from father to son and in parts of this country that will never change. All we can do is our part to make our slice of the world better. As parents and grandparents we have to set the example of inclusion. That is where the next generation will learn it.
Julie Cologrante Stephen I think what’s going on in Portland is a direct result of the national guard being brought in. I have friends in Portland who saw peaceful protesters pepper sprayed and knocked out. An accurate description of what I think is happening and what I’m standing behind is that this is a bus stop, not a taxi stop. You get on the bus headed in the direction you want to go, and the BLM movement is headed in the direction I want to go. I feel supporting BLM is the most helpful in this situation, with the president barely falling short of supporting white supremacists. The vast majority of looters are NOT affiliated with BLM and BLM protestors are actively protecting businesses. I applaud you wanting better for your grandchildren! In my opinion, calling people that support the firing of someone who influences youth for posting things ridiculing the BLM movement “liberals” does not help create that world. This isn’t liberal; it’s humanitarian. This will be my last response, but thank you for the respectful conversation! ?
First Amendment violation.
Freedom of speech I understand. Freedom to your opinion. When you represent a institution or a company. They have a right to terminate. Must stay neutral. I know I was a coach. I kept politics and religion out of my coaching. I just coached the sport. Helped the kids with goal setting, teamwork, perfecting their skills, focus and determination. Kept my opinions to myself.
Juan Carrillo there’s no allegation that he brought his opinions to practice. It was a social media post. Public sector employees have a Constitutionally protected right to comment on issues of public concern.
Juan Carrillo you are right. That needs to go for ALL political speak, including speaking about BLM.
Juan Carrillo good advice for all professional athletes! They should keep their BLM garbage away from their workplace. Can they be fired too?
What is unclear is, was the post on his own Facebook page or the team’s.
Coaches should never friend team parents. We already work in a goldfish bowl. I don’t talk politics or religion with my swimmers. I don’t friend parents.